Forward `impl` declaration of an incomplete interface (#5168)
carbon-language/carbon-lang: proposals/p5168.md

    -   Implied constraints allow declarations to be more concise, particularly
        we hope that common requirements can be omitted since they are implied.
    -   Implied constraints are also a tool we can choose to use to say that a
        requirement on a parameter can be enforced at a later point. In this
        example,

        ```
        interface B {}
        interface A;
        class C(T:! B);
        fn F(U:! A, x: C(U));

        interface A {
        require Self impls B;
        }
        ```

        the symbolic type parameter `U` has a constraint that it impls `A`, and
        we can add an implied constraint that it also impls `B` because it is
        used as an argument to `C`. This constraint might be redundant with a
        requirement from the definition of `A`, which may or may not have been
        available at the point where `F` is declared. Callers have to provide
        arguments that satisfy the additional requirement if it turns out that
        `A` alone is not sufficient.

### Other considerations

Different kinds of entities have different requirements (ignoring `extern`
declarations):

> -   A generic or compile-time function must be defined before it is called.

Reviewer: For a generic function, shouldn't it be sufficient for it to be defined later in the same file as the call? This rule disallows mutually recursive generic functions.

Author: I guess I'm thinking about evaluation of a function at compile time, where the evaluation may be later than the definition of the call. How should I phrase that?

Reviewer: If you want to get into that level of detail, then maybe something along these lines:

"A compile-time function must be defined before a call to it is evaluated. A generic function must be defined before the end of each file in which a call to it is type-checked."

Author: Updated.

    documentation for entity declaration design work
-   Pending
    [leads question #4566](https://github.com/carbon-language/carbon-lang/issues/4566):
    Implementing multiple interfaces with a single impl definition
    -   The currently proposed resolution includes `impl`ing an interface does
        not `impl` the interfaces it `extend`s, reducing the need to see the
        `interface` definition in `impl` declarations.
-   Pending
    [leads question #4579](https://github.com/carbon-language/carbon-lang/issues/4579):
    When are interface requirements enforced for an `impl`?
    -   Considers what is required and provided by `impl` forward declarations
        and definitions. This proposal offers a resolution to these questions.
-   Pending
    [leads question #4672](https://github.com/carbon-language/carbon-lang/issues/4672):
    Declaration and definition of impls and their associated functions
    -   The currently proposed resolution includes moving assignment of
        associated constants into the `impl` definition in the normal case,
        reducing the need to see the `interface` definition in `impl`
        declarations.

> -   Pending
>     [proposal #5087](https://github.com/carbon-language/carbon-lang/pull/5087):
>     Qualified lookup into types being defined
>     -   Allows member access inside a type's definition, in addition to
>         afterwards. Introduces the _defined_ terminology. This proposal assumes
>         that #5087 is adopted.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
-  [Proposal #5087](https://github.com/carbon-language/carbon-lang/pull/5087):
    Qualified lookup into types being defined
    -   Allows member access inside a type's definition, in addition to
        afterwards. Introduces the _defined_ terminology.
```

        `interface` definition in `impl` declarations.
-   Pending
    [leads question #4579](https://github.com/carbon-language/carbon-lang/issues/4579):
    When are interface requirements enforced for an `impl`?
    -   Considers what is required and provided by `impl` forward declarations
        and definitions. This proposal offers a resolution to these questions.
-   Pending
    [leads question #4672](https://github.com/carbon-language/carbon-lang/issues/4672):
    Declaration and definition of impls and their associated functions
    -   The currently proposed resolution includes moving assignment of
        associated constants into the `impl` definition in the normal case,
        reducing the need to see the `interface` definition in `impl`
        declarations.
-   Pending
    [proposal #5087](https://github.com/carbon-language/carbon-lang/pull/5087):
    Qualified lookup into types being defined
    -   Allows member access inside a type's definition, in addition to
        afterwards. Introduces the _defined_ terminology. This proposal assumes
        that #5087 is adopted.

### Terminology

-   A _declaration_ specifies information about an entity. Declarations are

>     either _forward declarations_ (which generally generally end with a

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
    either _forward declarations_ (which generally end with a
```

    semicolon `;`) or _definitions_ (which generally end with a body enclosed in
    curly braces `{`...`}`).
-   We say an entity is _declared_ by the first declaration textually in the
    source. If that declaration is a definition, we say the entity is declared
    at the point the body begins (at the open curly `{`).
-   We say an entity is _defined_ once the body of its definition is started (at

>     the open curly `{`). We allow name lookup into an entity once they are

Reviewer 2: I think either:
```suggestion
    the open curly `{`). We allow name lookup into an entity once it is
```

or:
```suggestion
    the open curly `{`). We allow name lookup into entities once they are
```

    // doesn't use implied constraints:
    fn Contains[U:! type where .Self impls Hash]
               (needle: U, haystack: HashSet(U)) -> bool;

    // In this example, the implied constraint is on something more
    // complicated than a single symbolic parameter.
    fn F[V:! type, W:! type](x: HashSet(Pair(V, W)));
    // is equivalent to:
    fn F[V:! type, W:! type where Pair(V, .Self) impls Hash]
        (x: HashSet(Pair(V, W)));
    ```

-   We generally require that there always be a way to explicitly declare
    constraints so implied constraints are not needed.
-   Implied constraints allow declarations to be more concise, particularly we
    hope that common requirements can be omitted since they are implied.
-   Implied constraints are also a tool we can choose to use to say that a
    requirement on a parameter can be enforced at a later point. For example, a
    symbolic type parameter could have a constraint that it impls `A`, and we
    might add an implied constraint that it also impls `B` without first
    determining whether implementing `A` implies it also implements `B`. Callers
    would have to provide arguments that satisfy the additional requirement if

>     it turns out that `A` alone is not sufficient.

Reviewer 2: Not sure it's a problem, but this point in particular I struggled to understand how this would manifest.... If important, might be worth an example? But maybe this is just a forward looking thing and doesn't need to be pinned down that much?

Author: Added example.

| `impl C as Y where .A =` ...                                                        | `Y` complete       | `C impls Y`                                                                            | **`impl C as Y` ...**                                        |
| `impl C as Y {` ... `}`                                                             | `Y` complete       | `C impls Y`                                                                            | `C`                                                          |
| `interface I;`                                                                      |                    | `I` declared                                                                           | `I`                                                          |
| `interface Y {` <br> ` require Self impls Z;` <br> `}`                              | **`Z` identified** | **for any symbolic type `T`, <br> `T impls Y` implies `T impls Z`; <br> `Y` complete** | `Z`                                                          |

> | `interface Y {` <br> ` require Self impls Z;` <br> `}` <br> `impl C as Y {` ... `}` | **`X impls Z`**    | **`X impls Y`**                                                                        |                                                              |

Reviewer 2: I think a type here? But not completely certain...

```suggestion
| `interface Y {` <br> ` require Self impls Z;` <br> `}` <br> `impl C as Y {` ... `}` | **`C impls Z`**    | **`C impls Y`**                                                                        |                                                              |
```

defined in terms of `Core.AddWith`. This requires that the facet type is
identified, at a minimum, when used in an `impl` declaration, so it can be
resolved into the single interface actually being implemented.

The "subsumption" use case of "when an interface X is implemented, Y will be
implemented without the user having to write a separate impl definition" will
instead be handled using
[blanket implementations](/docs/design/generics/details.md#blanket-impl-declarations).
There are a couple of variations:

-   One interface is a strict superset of the other. In this case it would be a
    lot less confusing/surprising if the interfaces use the same implementations
    of functions that overlap. This is accomplished using a
    [`final`](https://github.com/carbon-language/carbon-lang/blob/trunk/docs/design/generics/details.md#final-impl-declarations)
    blanket implementation. For example, we will define
    `final impl forall [T:! type, U:! ImplicitAs(T)] U as As(T)` and have
    `As(T).Convert` forward to `ImplicitAs(T).Convert`. This way types will
    either implement `ImplicitAs(T)` or `As(T)`, and will get an error if they

>     try to implement both.

Reviewer 2: I feel like we discussed this, and maybe I just forgot the answer, so apologies for that.

But could we make this the meaning of `extend` in an interface, and have the other case be handled with `requires Self impls ...` and an impl?

Specifically, could we have `extend` synthesize the final blanket impl as suggested here, and be restricted to only be allowed in the case that we can do so?

Author: That is not something we discussed, but would be viable. It would replace future work to have a way to do this more easily, at the cost of restricting `extend` to interfaces in the same file. It would mean that the combination of `require Self impls`... and `extend api`... that is currently represented by `extend` would be harder to say, but not too bad once we accept the `extend api` proposal.

-   One interface can be implemented in terms of the other. For example, if
    `Ordered` implies an implementation of `IsEqual`, types might still want to
    provide an explicit definition of `IsEqual` when they can do so more

>     efficiently. This would use a non-`final` blanket implementation.

Reviewer 2: FWIW, this doesn't feel like proper subsumption to me, and so I wonder if we want to go a bit further and specifically suggest *not* using `extend` for this?

Author: Under this proposal, this would be a non-`final` blanket impl, not a use of `extend`.

impl C as Y;
impl C as X { ... }
impl C as Y { }
```

This example demonstrates using associated constants and interface requirements:

```
interface X2 {
  let A:! type;
  let B:! type;
}
interface Y2 {
  require Self impls X2;
  // ✅ Allowed since `X2` is required and we can access
  // its `A` member since `X2` is complete.
  fn F() -> X2.A;
}

class C2 {}

impl C2 as X2 where .A = i32;

// ✅ Allowed since `C2` and `Y2` are complete, and
// `C2 impls X2` so `C2` satisfies the requirement in `Y2`.
impl C2 as Y2 {
  // ✅ Allowed since the value of `C2.(X2.A)` is known to
  // be `i32`, even though `impl C2 as X2` is not complete.
  fn F() -> i32;
}

// There needs to be a definition of `C2 as X2 where .A = i32`
// in the same file. The `where` clause needs to be repeated
// verbatim, since redeclaration requires a syntactic match.
impl C2 as X2 where .A = i32 {
  // Remaining members of `X2` that do not have default
  // values need to be assigned.
  where B = i32;
}
```

## Future work

### Addressing the subsumption use case previously addressed by extend interface

-   A feature to copy the members of an interface into another to make the

>     subsumption use case easier to write and involve less duplication.

Reviewer 2: It wasn't clear to me that this was removed by this proposal?

I thought it was just the *implementing* that was removed? Sorry if I've just misread the proposal or missed something.

Author: It wasn't removed since it wasn't the status quo. According to the design:
```
interface A {
  fn F();
  fn G();
}
interface B {
  extend A;
}
```
is equivalent to:
```
interface A {
  fn F();
  fn G();
}
interface B {
  require Self impls A;

  extend api A;
  // Or, since `extend api` is not accepted yet:
  alias F = A.F;
  alias G = A.G;
}
```
Which means `B` has names `F` and `G`, but they are pointers to functions in another interface, `A`. Those functions can be assumed to exist since `B` requires `A`.

This item is about a different thing:

```
interface A {
  fn F();
  fn G();
}
interface B {
  include api A;
}
```
equivalent to:
```
interface A {
  fn F();
  fn G();
}
interface B {
  fn F();
  fn G();
}
```
In this case `A.F` and `B.F` are different functions and can have different implementations.

Note that the orphan rule prevents this blanket impl from being written unless
the two interfaces in a subsumption relationship are in the same library.
Support for these use cases is
[future work](#addressing-the-subsumption-use-case-previously-addressed-by-extend-in-interfaces).
For now, `extend I;` in an interface definition continues to mean that `I` is
required and the names of `I` are included as aliases, matching the meaning in
named constraints, see "interface extension" in

> [proposal #553](https://github.com/carbon-language/carbon-lang/pull/553).

Author: Added text to clarify there is future work on `extend`.

    the `impl` definition. At that point, each associated constant that has not
    been assigned a value is given its default value. If it does not have a
    default, an error diagnostic is issued.
-   The associated function declarations are fixed by the end of the `impl`
    definition.
    -   Only associated functions with defaults may be omitted from the `impl`
        definition.
    -   Not mentioning an associated function with a default in the `impl`
        definition means the default version from the interface will be used.
    -   Associated functions declared in the `impl` definition must have a
        matching definition.
    -   If the declared signature of an associated function in the `impl`
        definition does not match the signature given in the `interface`
        definition, but are compatible, a stub function that does the conversion
        is generated to bridge between the two versions.
-   Out-of-line function bodies are allowed in the impl file, even when the
    `impl` definition is in the api file.
    -   This parallels how function definitions are not part of the definition
        of classes.

> -   Missing function body definitions are diagnosed at link time.

Author: I updated this section to reflect the change that we require impl definitions to contain associated function declarations.
